>> Jason Pamental: So there are a few
other kinds of classifications that you
will see.
Serif and
sans-serif are kinda the easy ones.
Slab serif, we tend to see a lot of.
Ever since web fonts became popular,
the two runaway favorites,
when web fonts first came on the scene,
was Museo and Museo Slab.
And those were type faces that
worked beautifully together.
One was a sans-serif,
one was a nicer of heavy slab serif which
works really nicely for large headlines.
Monospaced is what you see
in your code editors and
that is exactly what it means,
every letter takes up the same space.
So it's a lot easier for
you to read things in a more consistent
manner when you're looking at code.
Display type faces is
a bit of a catch all,
that really just means ones that
are generally better at large size.
So something that's really
specifically designed as a display
face might really only work at say 24 or
36 or 48 points or pixels,
as opposed to being really readable for
body copy, which might be rendered at 16.
Script, really popular on
wedding invitations and
lots of other printed material.
Not quite as popular on the web but
you still can use them to great effect and
there are a lot of really interesting.
Ones that are somewhere between a script
typeface and something handwritten,
generally referred to as lettering.
But I met a woman, Jess McCarty,
who has a type foundry
that really just focuses
on lettering fonts.
And she makes web versions of them, and
they're available all over the place.
Magpie Paperworks, she really does
some beautiful, beautiful work.
And that can really create
a really interesting effect,
when used sparingly, on the web.
You wouldn't necessarily want to
have your body copy in it, but
drawing people in with something that
looks really unique and interesting and
really different from what
you'd see somewhere else.
It works great on the chalk art
that you see outside stores.
There's no reason that it can't be
effective when you're using it on the web.
Blackletter probably not the most
common choice to use on the web.
Basically if you look at
the name of many newspapers,
it's set in some form of
blackletter like in New York Times,
in the Washington Post and
then handwriting is one.
I had to make sure that
it's not Comic Sans because
that's really just not worth including.
So some other type examples.
Things that you can look for are,
you notice on the left, it's very stable.
It's very centered, very heavy,
it's all about buying war bonds.
So this is about relating to the content.
So when you think about what you're
working on, again good type decisions that
like, good type decisions, it's one
thing to simply have a nice pair of type
faces or fonts that work well together,
but do they relate?
Are they adding to and
amplifying the message?
So, buying war bonds was a serious thing.
So this was probably back in the 30s,
when that was designed.
And that was the whole goal, it's
a serious thing, we want you to do this,
we need your support, we need you to
help support the coming war effort.
As opposed to the right,
which is far more whimsical and playful.
It's all about buying a bike.
So you can see this
totally different mood and
totally different style that's imparted
when you look at the left and the right.
And I think that if you want interesting
type inspiration, go google vintage
posters, and just start looking at things
through different periods in time.
It really does give you a great look into
what are some of the common themes and
trends in typography.
Will give you a lot of inspiration,
also for color palette, too.
>> Jason Pamental: Again, this is another
one that really relates to time and place.
These travel posters that I found for
Miami and
Cuba, a lot of them were
very specific to the 20s and
30s that was very kind of a big time for
that kind of tourism.
So it really did evoke that
sort of somewhat art deco, but
a little bit beachy kind of feel
that's very particular to design
that you would see from Miami and
Cuba in that time.
>> Jason Pamental: And then place.
It's hard to imagine something written and
designed in type set that way,
not being related to France.
There's just something about
that kind of style that is very
evocative of the time and place.
So these are just a few different examples
that I wanted to show you that power
that you can get from making
great typeface choices.
They may not be the things that you do
necessarily on the web, but you can.
There's no reason why if
working on a project for
a company that has a particular
relationship, if you're working on
a company that the founders are Dutch,
look at Dutch typefaces.
There's a lot of really beautiful ones.
Look at some of the color palettes.
I did some design work for
a friend of mine who was trying to
start a cycling villa in Spain.
So I bought a book on Spanish graphic
design, and looked at the typefaces and
the type designers.
I looked at the color palettes.
All of those things were, kind of,
my way in to see a culture that I
didn't really have any connection to.
So those are just some different avenues,
whether or
not you've been gone and
studied design, anybody can do this.
Doing a little bit of googling to see,
google type designers from this area or
this decade.
You'll find stuff online.
It'll start to give you a sense of
how to make these connections and
make the type relevant to the thing
that you're putting out there.
And now again just looking at how
you would pair them together,
these two typefaces similar
to what we were looking at
with that type anatomy slide,
very similar top and
bottom in overall geometric proportion.
This is also designed by the same person.
That's another really easy way to look for
typefaces that will go well together,
even though it might not be obvious.
If they're drawn by the same hand, they're
going to be some inherent similarities,
things that might not be
obvious on the surface, so
even in Google fonts you can figure
out who designed a given typeface.
Go look at some other
things that they designed.
And you might see some pairings that
would be a little bit unexpected.
So down below is Avante Garde,
above is Lubalin Graph.
It was designed by Herb Lubalin, I think
about ten years apart, but one clearly
grew out of the other, and that's why I
think they work really nicely together.
This is another example
that actually comes from,
I guess 1930s,
I think it was a Lincoln brochure,
and this was a pairing of Futura and
Bodoni.
So, Futura was this very sort of
futuristic art deco, kind of modernist
Sans Serif that you can see in the top
headline, where Bodoni has been around for
centuries and
it's this really classic serif typeface.
But they use them together really
effectively, and that's, I think,
a good example of what you can look
at when you start to work on your own
projects to get a sense of things.
You don't have to go with
kind of the web expected
Slab Serif headline and
San Serif body copy.
The screens are really good,
the phones we have in our pocket
have 300 points per inch.
The screens that we have on our
laptops are nearly as high res so
they can draw the shapes really nicely.
There's no need to shy away from
having a more delicate typeface for
the body copy, because it will kind
of read very nicely on a good screen.
And the thing about Serifs,
when that's what we're used to looking at,
is it connects the letters.
Those Serifs kinda create
a joining between them so
it actually will flow
a little bit more easily,
and really kind of help you kind of move
along the line of text and take it all in.
So when used effectively, a Serif for
body copy can be really quite elegant.
>> Jason Pamental: You
can get fonts anywhere.
A lot of people just
directly go to Google and
that's what they look
at are the free ones.
But fonts.com, Typekit,
MyFonts, TypeNetwork,
they all have pretty accessible,
pretty inexpensive licenses for fonts.
So there's no reason why when
somebody is spending a big chunk of
money on getting a website or an app done,
find out what their brand fonts are.
Find out if they're available.
Make sure you keep that consistency rather
than just going with something that kind
of looks like it.
Because chances are it's available.
Adobe is what's behind Typekit,
Monotype is who's behind Fonts.com.
Those are the two largest
type companies in the world.
It's almost unheard of for
a typeface used in a company brand to
not actually be available on the web.
And don't just go by whatever
style guide they hand you,
because most style guides these days
have not actually been written to take
into account that you can
use real type on the web.
A lot of them will still say here's what
we use in print, just use Arial over here.
We need to put Arial out to pasture, we
need to actually embrace using the brand
type face because that's
what builds a connection.
That's what will create that
unconscious tie between the user and
the organization or the brand that will
build that emotional connection and
keep people coming back and
really set things apart.
And so, we went from millions
of websites using Arial to
millions of website using Open Sans.
It's not that I don't like Open Sans,
it's a well done typeface, but
if everybody is using the same thing,
that is the simplest way for
you to stand out, is to use
something a little bit different.
As I said, most of the techniques that
we use in print are available in CSS and
even some things that
we can only do digital.
So now we'll start to look at actually how
some of these things are implemented and
see some stuff on screen and in code.